---
layout: post
title:  "Standing Desk Jockey Ergonomics pt.1 : the standing desk"
date:   2015-04-07 03:13:54
categories: body
---

TL;DR:

 * vary your day (walk/stand/split/sit/exercise)
 * do the ergo right and stand well from the beginning
 * good shoes or good mat
 * start out slowly.

Standing has been good for me.  Not as revolutionary as, for example, strength training has been.  Or shedding that rather unnecessary 60 pounds.  But it's been good.  It used to take a bunch of limbering and warming up before I could run after a day of work.  Now, I can pop into a run at the drop of a hat because my body's already "up and ready".  It's one of those seemingly paradoxical "spending more energy gives you more energy" things.

Of course, the first caveat is that "standing at work" doesn't mean the same as "sitting at work" in the common vernacular.  Most people who "sit at work" do so in a fairly static pattern for most of their ~8 hours.  One of the first things you should hear about stand-working is that, well, you shouldn't.  Not for hours at a go.  You're just not built for standing still all day.  Not much call for that in nature.

And yet, you're reading this because we aren't built to leadass all day, either.  Standing too much can do some weird things to your joints; sitting too much vomits all over your metabolism and funks with your soft tissues.

So take this transition in your life as a chance to stop that whole cycle of numbnuttery.  Find multilple positions to work in, integrate your ergo breaks into your productivity cycles, &c, &c.  Not everything has to be complicated, either.  Try mousing with your off hand.

One of the rules I developed early on is to sit whenever I'm not actively computer-using: talking to someone, reading on tree-corpses, writing something by hand.  Then take a little wander about the office.  It makes an easy balance to my standing, as I almost always confer with (or get bugged by) some other person in the office a few times a day.  An excellent autopilot for varying my sit-stand.

In that same vein, don't feel any need to go full monty the moment you get set up.  Add bits of standing time to your day.  Use these small trials to debug your technique.  I don't have a whole lot of advice here, as I transitioned cold-turkey, but it's important.  My pseudo-barefoot running and weight-lifting habit meant my feet/joints weren't bothered by the pressure, but standing incorrectly lead to some aches and pains.  So get that right.

My setup:

 * Aggie engineered standing desk
 * mat (I usually wear sandals in, kick them off in the office)
 * squishy baloony thing (if you "knead" it with your feet, it's like walking in place)
 * foam roller, lacrosse ball

I don't see much purpose in belaboring the particulars of my setup.  It's a smaller desk set on a bigger desk with my keyboard on cardboard boxes to obtain the ergonomically correct heights.  There are guides of excellent quality and clarity in abundance.  DuckDuckGo it.

I will emphasize is the importance of your standing surface.  Your feet are likely pampered-- not the nigh-impervious weatherworn soles of the hunter-gatherer on the savannah.  Or anyone who just doesn't do shoes.  I knew a guy.  How long has it been since your puppies have even seen raw, unfiltered ground?

So they're likely to freak a bit at, say, concrete or tile for hours at a time.  So bolt on a good pair of crosstrainers or slip in  mat of some squishyness.  Unfortunately, this is still a bit of a crutch.  The very comfort provided by such acoutrement can also hide pernicous problems in your stance.  The extra weight of, say, a collapsing knee will be obvious to your feet on a hard surface.  The squishy mat will obscure that information.  Remember that thing about standing well?  Do it.

Splitting your stance (e.g. the footrail for standing at a bar) helps take the load off, as you aren't really standing so much as resting in the middle of a walk motion.  I repurposed an old foam roller for this (did I mention the extreme Aggie-ness of my setup?).  I also enjoy this weird squishy ballony thing that I can kinda "knead" with my feet.  It's the standing version of sitting on a balance ball; it lets me wiggle while still working.  And you can go at it much longer than the (terrible) ball-sit since it corresponds roughly to walking.  Variety is the spice of your joints not hating you.

I don't have a stool, but it's a pretty good idea.  Any weight-bearing surface of the appropriate height (ladder, deask, two interns stacked on each other) will do.
